Arrays in Tralics
=================

We describe here the implementation of the arrays in *Tralics*. One has
to distinguish between `table` which is an environment in which you can
put some objects (in general tables) with a caption; like the `figure`
environment, this generates a floating object. On the other hand, the
`array` and `tabular` environments can be used to create table: the
first one is designed for math only, the second for non-math material.

The tabular environment {#tabular}
-----------------------

You can say `\begin{tabular}` followed by pos, cols, tabular material
and `\end{tabular}` or: `\begin{tabular*}` followed by size, pos, cols,
tabular material and `\end{tabular*}`.

In both cases, the result is a `<table>` element, with attribute
`rend='inline'`. In the second case, size has to be a dimension, for
instance `{.3pt}`, whose effect is to add the attribute pair
`width='0.3pt'` to the table. The pos argument should be one of `[t]`,
`[b]`, `[c]`, or omitted. (No error is signaled otherwise; in
particular, macros are neither expanded not evaluated). If not omitted,
the element has a `vpos` attribute whose value is `t`, `b` or `c`. The
translation of tabular material fills the element with some `<row>`
elements, each of which contains some `<cell>` elements. Each cell has a
position in the row; its translation depends on the position and the
cols specification. Example

::: {.container .ltx-source}
    \begin{tabular*}{10pc}[b]{lrc}
    \hline
    a&b&c\\[2pt]
    \multicolumn{1}{l}{A}&B&C\\\hline
    \end{tabular*}
:::

The translation is the following.

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table vpos='b' width='120.0pt' rend='inline'>
     <row  spaceafter='2.0pt' top-border='true'>
      <cell halign='left'>a</cell>
      <cell halign='right'>b</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>c</cell>
     </row>
     <row bottom-border='true'>
      <cell halign='left' cols='1'>A</cell>
      <cell halign='right'>B</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>C</cell>
     </row>
    </table>
:::

Preview ![some table](/img/img_73.png)

Not all names are hard-coded. If the configuration file contains the
following lines,

::: {.container .ltx-source}
    att_vpos = "Vpos"
    att_halign = "Halign"
    att_cols = "Cols"
    att_table_width = "Width"
    xml_table_name = "Table" 
    xml_row_name = "Row"
    att_row_spaceafter = "Spaceafter"
    xml_cell_name = "Cell"
    att_cell_left =  "Left"
    att_cell_right =  "Right"
    att_cell_center =  "Center"
    att_cell_leftborder = "Leftborder"
    att_cell_rightborder = "Rightborder"
    att_cell_topborder = "Topborder"
    att_cell_bottomborder = "Bottomborder"
    att_rend = "Rend"
:::

then the translation is the following.

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <Table Vpos='b' Width='120.0pt' Rend='inline'>
     <Row Spaceafter='2.0pt' Topborder='true'>
      <Cell Halign='Left'>a</Cell>
      <Cell Halign='Right'>b</Cell>
      <Cell Halign='Center'>c</Cell>
     </Row>
     <Row Bottomborder='true'>
      <Cell Halign='Left' Cols='1'>A</Cell>
      <Cell Halign='Right'>B</Cell>
      <Cell Halign='Center'>C</Cell>
     </Row>
    </Table>
:::

Interpreting the preamble {#preamble}
-------------------------

The preamble of the array is the quantity marked cols in the description
above. This is a specification for columns. It specifies how the columns
should be formatted. In standard LaTeX, you cannot use more columns than
specified; in *Tralics*, this is not relevant.

As the previous example shows, there are three standard column types:
`c`, `l` and `r`, (centered, left-aligned, right-aligned). The effect is
to add an attribute pair of the form `halign='center'`. If a row
contains more cells than in the specification, these extra cells have no
`halign` attribute. You can also say `p{dim}`. This should typeset the
column in a `\parbox[t]{dim}`. This feature is not implemented: the
argument is ignored, and `p` is replaced by `c`.

The array.sty package adds two options: `m` and `b`. The `b` option is
like the `p` option, but bottom-aligned. The `m` option should be used
only in math mode (i.e. for the `array` environment, and not `tabular`).
In *Tralics*, there is no difference between `b`, `m` and `p`.

There is an `@{text}` option. It inserts *text* in every row, where
*text* is processed in math mode in the `array` environment and in LR
mode in the `tabular` and `tabular*` environments. Such an expression
suppresses the space that LaTeX normally inserts between columns. For
instance, an array specification like `{l@{\hspace{1cm}}l}` says that
the two columns of text should be separated by exactly one centimeter. A
specification like `{@{}c@{}}` says that no additional space should be
added neither of the left not the right of the column. An
`\extracolsep{wd}` command can be used inside such an expression. It
causes an extra space to appear to the left of all subsequent columns.
Note that `\extracolsep` expands to `\tabskip`; this TeX primitive is
not implemented in *Tralics*. In fact, *Tralics* ignores an `@` and its
argument.

You can use a `|` for specifying a vertical rule. However, in *Tralics*
you cannot use double or triple rules. Sorry. There is also a `!{...}`
option that is not implemented.

Every specification (`l`, `r`, `c`, `b`, `p`, `m`) can be preceded by a
`>{xx}` declaration and followed by a `<{yy}` declaration, where xx and
yy are arbitrary (see comments below), respectively called the *u*-part
and *v*-part of the template. In case of multiple declarations, the last
will be executed first. Said otherwise, `>{3}>{b}c<{a}<{z}` is the same
as `>{b3}c<{za}`. The effect is to insert `b3` before the cell in the
current position, and `za` after the cell. Note that the cell is
finished when a token is sensed that indicates either a new cell, a new
row or the end of the array. Technically, this means a `&`, a `\\`, or
an `\end` (the end of the environment) after "full" expansion. A special
marker is pushed back after the *v*-part. This is `\endtemplate` in the
case of a cell, and `\cr` in the case of `\\`. You should not use `\cr`
or `\crcr` outside an array defined by `\halign` (this is not yet
implemented). You must be careful that the *v*-part does not contain
something that reads the special end marker. For instance
`\def\x#1{}\halign{#\x&#\cr 1&2\cr}` is an error.

Finally, `*{N}{text}` can be used instead of N occurrences of `text`.

Note. At the end of Chapter 22 of the [TeXbook](index.html#texbook),
Knuth gives an example of a table where the preamble is
`\centerline{#}`. Such a construction cannot be done in *Tralics*, since
`>{\centerline?}c<{?}` would transform into `\centerline?#?` and
question marks cannot be replaced by braces; you could try
`>{\expandafter\centerline?}` and replace the question mark by something
that expands to an open brace but contains as many open braces as
closing ones, for instance `\expandafter{\iffalse}\fi`. This fails as
*Tralics* finds some invalid command; it also fails without the
`\expandafter`, (the closing `\fi` is not found). Finally, this fails
also: `>{\centerline\bgroup}c<{\egroup}`.

Knuth says that an entry of the form `a}b{c` is legitimate, with respect
to this template. This cannot be the case in *Tralics*, but it would be
valid for a template like `>{\bgroup\bf}c<{\egroup}`. This justifies
that a table has to be terminated by `\cr` or `\crcr`. In the case of
*Tralics*, this is not needed.

Math shift characters in a preamble {#mathpreamble}
-----------------------------------

Inserting the *v*-part of the template at the right moment is not a
trivial task, and before November 2015, *Tralics* failed to do it in
math mode. The following example now compiles.

::: {.container .ltx-source}
:

    \newenvironment{tab}{Table \begin{tabular}{>{\before} c<{\after}c}}{\end{tabular}}
    \def\before{Before}\def\after{After}%
    \begin{tab}x\end{tab}%
    \def\before{$\bgroup}\def\after{\egroup$}%
    \tracingall
    \begin{tab}c&math before amp brace \end{tab}
    \begin{tab}x\end{tab}
    \newenvironment{xtab}{\begin{tabular}{>{\before} cc}}{\after\end{tabular}}
    \begin{xtab}ww\end{xtab}
:::

We give here part of the trace for the second array. When the line
marked "Hack1" is sensed, the situation is the following. The save stack
holds: the `document` environment, the `tab` environment, the `tabular`
environment, a cell group, a math group, and a brace group (watch for
stack: level). The XML stack holds the document, the table, a row, a
cell (watch for Push and Pop); note that the current paragraph was
ended, and another one will be started after the array. *Tralics* sees
an ampersand character whose meaning is: finish the current cell and
start a new one. This is not possible, since a closing brace is
expected. The hack is the following: if *Tralics* is scanning a math
formula and sees `&` or `\\`, if the save stack holds a cell below the
math (ignoring brace groups), if the top of the XML stack holds a cell,
with a non-empty *v*-part, then the *v*-part is inserted, and the `&` or
`\\` is marked to be read again. If the first two conditions hold but
not the last (no *v*-part to insert) an error is signaled and parsing of
the math formula stops. In this example the conditions are fulfilled and
`\after` is inserted. Expanding this yields the closing brace and the
closing dollar. On line "Hack2", you can see all tokens (after full
expansion) that were read as part of the math formula; there is an &,
but it is not part of the formula. It is read again (as "alignment tab
character" ) and evaluates to `\endtemplate`. This finishes the cell and
starts a new one. Note: we have simplified the remaining of the trace by
showing only the modifications to the save stack and XML stack.

::: {.container .log_out}
    [6] \begin{tab}c&math before amp brace \end{tab}
    {\begin}
    {\begin tab}
    +stack: level + 2 for environment entered on line 6
    \tab ->Table \begin {tabular}{>{\before } c<{\after }c}
    Character sequence: Table .
    {\begin}
    {Text:Table }
    {\begin tabular}
    +stack: level + 3 for environment entered on line 6
    {\tabular}
    {Pop 1: document_v p_v}
    {Push tabular 1}
    % Array preamble parsing omitted
    {Push row 2}
    {Push cell 3}
    +stack: level + 4 for cell entered on line 6
    {template u-part \before }
    \before ->$\bgroup 
    {math shift character}
    +stack: level + 5 for math entered on line 6
    +stack: level + 6 for brace entered on line 6
    {template v-part \after }  % Hack1
    \after ->\egroup $
    +stack: level - 6 for brace from line 6
    +stack: level - 5 for math from line 6
    Math: $\bgroup c&\egroup$  % Hack2
    {Inline formula ...} % details omitted
    {alignment tab character}
    {\endtemplate}
    {Pop 3: document_v tabular_v row_a cell_a}
    +stack: level - 4 for cell from line 6
    {Push cell 3}
    % more lines omitted
    +stack: level + 4 for cell entered on line 6
    {Pop 3: document_v tabular_v row_a cell_a}
    +stack: level - 4 for cell from line 6
    {Pop 2: document_v tabular_v row_a}
    {Pop 1: document_v tabular_v}
    {Push p 1}
    +stack: level - 3 for environment from line 6
    +stack: level - 2 for environment from line 6
:::

The next example is similar to the previous one. When the line marked
"Hack3" is seen we are in exactly the same situation as described above
but instead of an ampersand character we have `\end`. The same algorithm
is applied. However no error is signaled if there is no *v*-part on the
stack (this is needed in order to make the last example work). After the
formula has been translated, *Tralics* sees the `\end` command, and
interprets it; it expands to `\end {tabular}`. At this moment (marked
"Hack4"), the *v*-part of the template is inserted (as at was already
inserted, nothing happens here), as well as the `\cr` token. Its effect
is to pop the XML stack as well as the save stack: this finishes the
current cell. The XML stack is popped again (there is nothing to pop on
the save stack): this finishes the current row. Then `\end {tabular}` is
evaluated again. This pops the XML stack and finishes the array. After
that, the save stack is popped twice: once for each `\end` command.

::: {.container .log_out}
    [7] \begin{tab}x\end{tab}
    % Some lines omitted (same as above)
    {Push row 2}
    {Push cell 3}
    +stack: level + 4 for cell entered on line 7
    +stack: level + 5 for math entered on line 7
    +stack: level + 6 for brace entered on line 7
    {template v-part \after } % Hack3
    \after ->\egroup $
    +stack: level - 6 for brace from line 7
    +stack: level - 5 for math from line 7
    Math: $\bgroup x\end\egroup$
    {Inline formula ...} % details omitted
    {\end}
    {\end tab}
    \endtab ->\end {tabular}
    {\end}
    {\end tabular}  % Hack4
    {\cr}
    {Pop 3: document_v tabular_v row_a cell_a}
    +stack: level - 4 for cell from line 7
    {Pop 2: document_v tabular_v row_a}
    {\end}
    {\end tabular}
    {\endtabular}
    {Pop 1: document_v tabular_v}
    {Push p 1}
    {\endenv}
    +stack: restoring \par=\par.
    +stack: ending environment tabular; resuming tab.
    +stack: level - 3 for environment from line 7
    {\endenv}
    +stack: ending environment tab; resuming document.
    +stack: level - 2 for environment from line 7
:::

New column types {#columntypes}
----------------

You can say things like these

::: {.container .ltx-source}
:

    \newcolumntype{C}{>{$}c<{$}}
    \newcolumntype{L}{>{$}l<{$}}
    \newcolumntype{R}{>{$}r<{$}}
    \newcolumntype{d}[1]{>{\rightdots{#1}}r<{\endrightdots}}
    \newcolumntype{X}{CLR}

    \begin{tabular}{*{3}{|c|}d{23}X}
    \end{tabular}
:::

In this case, the transcript file will contains

::: {.container .log_out}
:

    array preamble at start: |c||c||c|d{23}X
    array preamble after X: |c||c||c|d{23}CLR
    array preamble after d: |c||c||c|>{\rightdots {23}}r<{\endrightdots }CLR
    array preamble after C: |c||c||c|>{\rightdots {23}}r<{\endrightdots }>{$}c<{$}LR
    array preamble after L: |c||c||c|>{\rightdots {23}}r<{\endrightdots }>{$}c<{$}>{$}l<{$}R
    array preamble after R: |c||c||c|>{\rightdots {23}}r<{\endrightdots }>{$}c<{$}>{$}l<{$}>{$}r<{$}
    array preamble parse: | c | | c 1| | c 2| >3>{} r <<{} >4>{} c <<{} >5>{} l <<{} >6>{} r <<{} 7
:::

The first line is printed after evaluation of the `*` arguments.

After that, the preamble contains, at toplevel (outside braces) two
characters `d` and `X` that are defined to be new column types. These
are evaluated one after the other (the order is irrelevant, here
alphabetic order is used so that `X` is expanded first). Since the
expansion was non trivial, a second try is made. Note that only a finite
numbers of tries are executed. In case of recursion, strange things can
happen. Note how you can use commands with arguments (here `d` takes one
argument, it is `23`).

The last line of the transcript indicates parsing of standard options.
In the case of `p{...}`, you will see a `p` first, followed by a `p{}`.
Whenever a new cell is started, a number is printed. Hence `c 1`
indicates that cell 0 was finished, cell 1 started, and cell is is
centered; `>5>{}` means that cell 5 was started because of the \> sign.
The final number just says that the seventh cell information were
stored. \[**Note:** these numbers are not printed anymore in the current
version\].

Another example {#example2}
---------------

We consider here the following new column types. As you can see, one of
them is the character `+` , another is the character `_` . The fact that
these characters have special catcodes is irrelevant (they cannot be of
catcode 1 and 2, because this would interfere with brace matching, and
they cannot be of catcode 10, because space characters should be ignored
in the preamble).

::: {.container .ltx-source}
:

    \newcolumntype{L} {>{\large\bfseries 2}l <{y}|}
    \newcolumntype{+} {>{B}l <{D}|}
    \newcolumntype{_}{rlc<{x}}
    \newcolumntype{x}{>{b}c<{a}}
:::

Consider the four following tables

::: {.container .ltx-source}
:

    \begin{tabular*}{5cm}[b]{*{4}{_c|}}
    a1&a2&a3&a4  & b1&b2&b3&b4 & c1&c2&c3&c4& d1&d2&d3&d4\\
    Wa1&Wa2&Wa3&Wa4  & Wb1&Wb2&Wb3&Wb4 & Wc1&Wc2&Wc3&Wc4& Wd1&Wd2&Wd3&Wd4\\
    \end{tabular*}

    \begin{tabular}{|ll|rr|cc|}
    \hline a&b&c&d&e&f\\
    aaa&bbb&ccc&ddd&eee&fff\\
    \hline
    A&\multicolumn{3}{+}{C}&E&F\\
    \multicolumn{2}{|l}{ab}&c&d&e&f\\
    \cline{1-3}\cline{6-6}
    aaa&bbb&ccc&ddd  &eee&fff\\\hline
    \end{tabular}

    \begin{tabular} {| >{\large 1}c <{x}| L > {\large\itshape 3}c <{z}|}
    \hline A&B&C\\\hline 100&10 &1\\\hline
    \end{tabular}


    \begin{tabular} {| >{\large 1}c <{x}| L > {\large\itshape 3}x <{z}|}
    \hline A&B&C\\\hline 100&10 &1
    \end{tabular}
:::

Preview is below. Currently, each table is as wide as the current page.
This is a bad thing, it should be arranged in a future version.

![four tables](/img/img_74.png)

This is the XML translation of the first table. Note how the first two
arguments `{5cm}[b]` are translated. Note also the preamble:
`*{4}{_c|}`. This means a sequence, repeated for times, of a
right-aligned cell, a left-aligned cell, a centered cell and a cell with
a vertical rule after it. The table is terminated by a `\\`, this one is
not necessary.

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table vpos='b' width='142.26378pt' rend='inline'>
    <row><cell halign='right'>a1</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>a2</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>a3x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>a4</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>b1</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>b2x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>b3</cell>
    <cell halign='right'>b4</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>c1</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>c2x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>c3</cell>
    <cell halign='right'>c4</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>d1</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>d2x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>d3</cell>
    <cell>d4</cell>
    </row><row><cell halign='right'>Wa1</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>Wa2</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>Wa3x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>Wa4</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>Wb1</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>Wb2x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>Wb3</cell>
    <cell halign='right'>Wb4</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>Wc1</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>Wc2x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>Wc3</cell>
    <cell halign='right'>Wc4</cell>
    <cell halign='left'>Wd1</cell>
    <cell halign='center'>Wd2x</cell>
    <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>Wd3</cell>
    <cell>Wd4</cell>
    </row></table>
:::

This is the translation of the third table. The preamble of the table is
something like `|c|l|c|`, indicating a centered row, a left-aligned row
and a centered row. There are four vertical rules, the first two ones
are attached to the first cell, and after that, there is a rule on the
right of each cell. The specification of the second cell is `L`, and,
after expansion, `>{\large\bfseries 2}l <{y}`, so that a `B` is replaced
by `\large\bfseries 2By`. Remember that each cell is translated in a
group, so that the scope of the `\large\bfseries` is limited to a single
cell.

In the example we can see that `\hline` produces an horizontal rule by
adding an attribute to the row that precedes it (the `\hline` at the
start of the table induces a second rule for the first row).

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table rend='inline'>
     <row bottom-border='true' top-border='true'>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='center' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'>1Ax</hi></cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='bold'>2By</hi></hi></cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='it'>3Cz</hi></hi></cell>
     </row>
     <row bottom-border='true'>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='center' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'>1100x</hi></cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='bold'>210y</hi></hi></cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='it'>31z</hi></hi></cell>
    </row></table>
:::

This is the fourth table. It is like the table above, without the final
`\\\hline`. As you can see, the end of a cell is obtained when the next
character is either `&` (and the cell is followed by another cell), or a
`\\` command (and this means the end of a complete row), or, as in this
case, a `\\end` command. In this case, we have to insert the `<{}`
material, and the `\end` token.

The specifications of the last column are `>{\large\itshape 3}x <{z}|`.
If we replace `x` by its value, we get
`>{\large\itshape 3}>{b}c<{a}<{z}|` and this is the same as
`>{b\large\itshape 3}c<{za}|`. This strange behavior is explained in the
array.sty documentation.

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table rend='inline'>
     <row bottom-border='true' top-border='true'>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='center' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'>1Ax</hi></cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='bold'>2By</hi></hi></cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>b<hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='it'>3Cza</hi></hi></cell>
     </row>
     <row>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='center' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'>1100x</hi></cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'><hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='bold'>210y</hi></hi></cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>b<hi rend='large1'></hi><hi rend='large1'><hi rend='it'>31za</hi></hi></cell>
     </row>
    </table>
:::

This is now the second table. Its preamble is`|ll|rr|cc|`, this means
two left-align columns, two right-aligned columns, and two centered
columns, with four vertical rules. The table contains three `\hline`,
hence three horizontal rules.

The table contains `\multicolumn{2}{|l}{ab}` at the start of row 4. This
means that a cell spans two columns. The preamble `|ll|` is replaced by
`|l`, this means an interruption of the second vertical rule. The
quantity `ab` is translated (inside a group), an put in this cell.

The table contains `\multicolumn{3}{+}{C}` in row 3. We have something
that spans three rows, thus removing `l|rr|` from the preamble,
replacing it by `+`. This is handled like a normal preamble (but for one
column only), and here is `>{B}l <{D}|`. In fact, since the cell
contains `C`, it is as if you said `\multicolumn{3}{l|}{BCD}`. Normally,
the vertical rule implied by the bar should span the whole table. The
hole is strange.

The table contains also a `\cline{1-3}\cline{6-6}` instead of a
`\hline`. This indicates a horizontal rule that spans columns 1, 2, 3
and 6 (hence column 4 and 5 are omitted). In the translation, a
`bottom-border` attribute is used for each cell, instead of a unique
attribute for the row. Note that, in the example, there is a cell that
spans columns 1 and 2, so that only three cells are marked.

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table rend='inline'>
     <row top-border='true'>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='left'>a</cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'>b</cell>
      <cell halign='right'>c</cell>
      <cell halign='right' right-border='true'>d</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>e</cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>f</cell>
     </row>
     <row bottom-border='true'>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='left'>aaa</cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'>bbb</cell>
      <cell halign='right'>ccc</cell>
      <cell halign='right' right-border='true'>ddd</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>eee</cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>fff</cell>
     </row>
     <row>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='left'>A</cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true' cols='3'>BCD</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>E</cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>F</cell>
     </row>
     <row>
      <cell bottom-border='true' left-border='true' halign='left' cols='2'>ab</cell>
      <cell bottom-border='true' halign='right'>c</cell>
      <cell halign='right' right-border='true'>d</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>e</cell>
      <cell bottom-border='true' halign='center' right-border='true'>f</cell>
     </row>
     <row bottom-border='true'>
      <cell left-border='true' halign='left'>aaa</cell>
      <cell halign='left' right-border='true'>bbb</cell>
      <cell halign='right'>ccc</cell>
      <cell halign='right' right-border='true'>ddd</cell>
      <cell halign='center'>eee</cell>
      <cell halign='center' right-border='true'>fff</cell>
     </row>
    </table>
:::

The implementation of `\cline` is the following; assume that the
arguments are *A* and *B*. If the command is placed after a row contains
cells *c1*, *c2*, etc, if there are integers *i* and *j*, such that the
total span of rows less than *i* is *A-1* and the total span of rows
with index between *i* and *j* is *B-A+1* then a `bottom-border='true'`
attribute is added to these cells. If the total span *c* of the row is
at most *A-1*, then *Tralics* inserts an empty cell whose span is
*A-1-c* (unless this quantity is zero), then an empty cell with span
*B-A+1* and a `bottom-border='true'` attribute. If this fails, the
current row is ignored if it contains an empty cell, followed by a
possible newline marker; a new row is added, and the previous rule is
applied, with *c=0*. The span attribute has the form `cols='3'`, it is
omitted when the value is one. In the example that follows, the effect
of the `\\` command between the two `\cline` is to start a new row, and
a left aligned cell with a vertical rule on the left. Such a cell is
considered empty, thus removed; as a consequence this `\\` has no effect
at all.

::: {.container .ltx-source}
:

    \begin{tabular}{|ll|rr|cc|}
    A&\multicolumn{3}{l}{BCD}&E&F\cline{1-3}\\\cline{6-6}  
    A&\multicolumn{3}{l}{BCD}&E&F\\\cline{1-3}\\\cline{6-6}  
    z&t\\ \cline{3-3}
    \end{tabular}
:::

::: {.container .xml_out}
:

    <table rend='inline'>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left' left-border='true'>A</cell>
        <cell halign='left' cols='3'>BCD</cell>
        <cell halign='center'>E</cell>
        <cell right-border='true' halign='center'>F</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell bottom-border='true' cols='3'/>
        <cell cols='2'/>
        <cell bottom-border='true'/>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left' left-border='true'>A</cell>
        <cell halign='left' cols='3'>BCD</cell>
        <cell halign='center'>E</cell>
        <cell right-border='true' halign='center'>F</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell bottom-border='true' cols='3'/>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left' left-border='true'/>
        <cell cols='4'/>
        <cell bottom-border='true'/>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left' left-border='true'>z</cell>
        <cell right-border='true' halign='left'>t</cell>
        <cell bottom-border='true'/>
      </row>
    </table>
:::

The booktabs extension {#booktab}
----------------------

This package introduces some commands that control the width of
horizontal rules in tables. Here is an example from the documentation

::: {.container .ltx-source}
:

    \begin{tabular}{@{}llr@{}} \toprule
    \multicolumn{2}{c}{Item}\\ \cmidrule(r){1-2}
    Animal& Description & Price (\$) \\ \midrule
    Gnat & per gram & 13.63 \\
            & each & 0.01\\
    Gnu  & stuffed& 92.50 \\
    Emu & stuffed & 33.33\\
    Armadillo& frozen &8.99 \\ \bottomrule
    \end{tabular}
:::

The following three commands `\toprule`, `\midrule` and `\bottomrule`
are assumed to be the first rule, an inner rule, or the last rule of the
table. There effect is to add to the table some vertical space, a rule,
and some other vertical space. The spaces are `\aboverulesep` and
`\belowrulesep`, except that above the first rule there is
`\abovetopsep`, and below the last rule there is `\belowbottomsep`. The
thickness of a normal rule is `\lightrulewidth`, but the first and last
rules have thickness `\heavyrulewidth`. The three commands take an
optional parameter, the thickness of the rule. The command
`\specialrule` take three arguments: width, space above, and space
below. Below is the XML translation; you can see that the default space
above the first rule and below the last rule are zero, such zero values
are not indicated.

The package provides also `\cmidrule`. This command takes an optional
argument (a width; default is `\cmidrulewidth`), a trim argument and a
column specification. The column specification is an interval, `1-2`, in
the example above; it says that a rule spanning columns 1 to 2 should be
used. The trim argument explains how this rule has to be trimmed on the
left, or right, this argument is ignored by *Tralics*. We use the same
algorithm as for [\\cline](doc-c.html#cmd-cline). In the case of
`\cmidrule[3pt](){1-3}\cmidrule[2pt](){3-4}`, cell number 3 has a width
of 2pt. You can use the command `\morecmidrules` in order to avoid this.
This is implemented as `\\`.

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table rend='inline'>
      <row top_rule_space_below='2.76247pt' border-top-width='0.80002pt' top-border='true'>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='2.76247pt'
         bottom_rule_space_above='1.69997pt' border-bottom-width='0.29999pt'
        bottom-border='true' halign='right' cols='2'>Item  
        </cell>
      </row>
      <row bottom_rule_space_below='2.76247pt'
        bottom_rule_space_above='1.69997pt'  border-bottom-width='0.50003pt' 
        bottom-border='true'>
        <cell halign='left'>Animal</cell>
        <cell halign='left'>Description</cell>
        <cell>Price ($)</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left'>Gnat</cell>
        <cell halign='left'>per gram</cell>
        <cell>13.63</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left'/>
        <cell halign='left'>each</cell>
        <cell>0.01</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left'>Gnu</cell>
        <cell halign='left'>stuffed</cell>
        <cell>92.50</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell halign='left'>Emu</cell>
        <cell halign='left'>stuffed</cell>
        <cell>33.33</cell>
      </row>
      <row bottom_rule_space_above='1.69997pt' 
        border-bottom-width='0.80002pt' bottom-border='true'>
        <cell halign='left'>Armadillo</cell>
       <cell halign='left'>frozen</cell>
       <cell>8.99</cell>
      </row>
    </table>
:::

An example that shows how `\morecmidrules` works.

::: {.container .ltx-source}
    \setlength\aboverulesep{6pt}
    \setlength\belowrulesep{4pt}
    \setlength\cmidrulewidth{5pt}
    \begin{tabular}{llll}
    a&b&c&d\\ \cmidrule[3pt](rl){1-3}\cmidrule[2pt](lr){3-4}
    A&B&C&D\\ \cmidrule[3pt](){1-3}\morecmidrules\cmidrule[2pt](){3-4}
    \end{tabular}
:::

::: {.container .xml_out}
    <table rend='inline'>  
      <row>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='3.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>a</cell>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='3.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>b</cell>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='2.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>c</cell>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='2.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>d</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='3.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>A</cell>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='3.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>B</cell>
        <cell bottom_rule_space_below='4.0pt'
          bottom_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-bottom-width='3.0pt' bottom-border='true' halign='left'>C</cell>
        <cell halign='left'>D</cell>
      </row>
      <row>
        <cell cols='2'/>
        <cell top_rule_space_below='4.0pt' top_rule_space_above='6.0pt'
          border-top-width='2.0pt' top-border='true' cols='2'/>
      </row>
    </table>
:::
